# NetworkHawkesProcesses.jl
`NetworkHawkesProcess.jl` implements a class of probabilistic models that combine multivariate Hawkes processes with network models ([Linderman, 2016](https://dash.harvard.edu/handle/1/33493391)). The intensity of such models takes the form

```math
\lambda_n(t) = \lambda_n^{(0)}(t) + \sum_n \sum_{\substack{c_i = n,\\ s_i < t}} a_{n \rightarrow '} h_{n \rightarrow n'}(t - s_i \ | \ \theta_{n \rightarrow n'}),
```
where ``a_{n \rightarrow n'}`` is a binary variable representing the existence of a directed link from process ``n`` to process ``n'`` generated by a process

```math
a_{n \rightarrow n'} \sim p(a_{n \rightarrow n'} \ | \ \eta_{n \rightarrow n'})
```

These models--**network Hawkes processes**--permit simultaneous inference on the structure of a network and its event generating process. The `NetworkHawkesProcesses` package provides methods to simulate and estimate such processes. It allows researchers to construct models from a flexible set of model components, run inference from a list of compatible methods (including maximum-likelihood estimation, Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling, and variational inference), and explore results with visualization and diagnostic utilities.


## Package Features
- Supports continuous and discrete processes
- Uses modular design to support extensible components
- Implements simulation via Poisson thinning
- Provides multiple estimation/inference methods
- Supports a wide range of network specifications
- Supports non-homogeneous baselines
- Accelerates methods via Julia's built-in multithreading module


## Getting Started

### Installation
```julia
julia> using Pkg;
julia> Pkg.add("https://github.com/cswaney/NetworkHawkesProcesses.jl.git")
# or pkg> add "https://github.com/cswaney/NetworkHawkesProcesses.jl.git"
```

### Creating Processes
Proceses are constructed from a combination of component models. All processes require a `Baseline` model, and `ImpulseResponse` model, and a `Weights` model. For a `ContinuousStandardHawkesProces`, which does not incorporate network structe, these are all that is needed:
```julia
using NetworkHawkesProcesses

nnodes = 2
weight = 0.1
Δtmax = 1.0

baseline = NetworkHawkesProcesses.HomogeneousProcess(ones(nnodes))
weights = NetworkHawkesProcesses.DenseWeightModel(weight .* ones(nnodes, nnodes))
impulses = NetworkHawkesProcesses.ExponentialImpulseResponse(ones(nnodes, nnodes))
process = NetworkHawkesProcesses.ContinuousStandardHawkesProcess(baseline, impulses, weights)
```

A `ContinuousNetworkHawkesProces` requires a `Network` model and adjacency matrix as well:
```julia
network = NetworkHawkesProcesses.BernoulliNetworkModel(0.5, nnodes)
links = NetworkHawkesProcesses.rand(network)
process = NetworkHawkesProcesses.ContinuousNetworkHawkesProcess(baseline, impulses, weights, links, network)
```

Discrete processes are constructed in a similar fashion, but some component models must be changed to an appropriate discrete version and a time step size is required. For example, here is how to construct a `DiscreteStandardHawkesProcess`:
```julia
nnodes = 2
nbasis = 3
nlags = 4
weight = 0.1
dt = 1.0

baseline = NetworkHawkesProcesses.DiscreteHomogeneousProcess(ones(nnodes), dt)
weights = NetworkHawkesProcesses.DenseWeightModel(weight .* ones(nnodes, nnodes))
impulses = NetworkHawkesProcesses.DiscreteGaussianImpulseResponse(ones(nnodes, nnodes, nbasis) ./ nbasis, nlags, dt)
process = NetworkHawkesProcesses.DiscreteStandardHawkesProcess(baseline, impulses, weights, dt)
```

A `DiscreteNetworkHawkesProcess` only requires the addition of a `Network` model and adjacency matrix:
```julia
network = NetworkHawkesProcesses.BernoulliNetworkModel(0.5, nnodes)
links = NetworkHawkesProcesses.rand(network)
process = NetworkHawkesProcesses.DiscreteNetworkHawkesProcess(baseline, impulses, weights, links, network, dt)
```

### Simulating Data
Following conventional (e.g., `Disctributions`), `NetworkHawkesProcesses` defines `rand` methods for the purpose of simulating data:
```julia
events, nodes, duration = rand(process, 100.0) # typeof(process) == ContinuousHawkesProcess
data = rand(process, 100) # typeof(process) == DiscreteHawkesProcess
```

Generally, the simulation `duration` is any positive value, but some baselines (e.g., `LogGaussianCoxProcess`) define a maximum duration.

Note that the format of simulated data is quite different for continuous and discrete processes. For continuous processes, simulation returns separate arrays of event times and nodes, in addition to the simulation duration. For discrete processes, simulated data is represented as a matrix whose rows contain event counts for each node, with each column representing a time step.
```julia
size(data) # (2, 100)
```

### Running Inference
The package provides several method for performing inference, including maximum-likelihood estimation (`mle!`), Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling (`mcmc!`), and variational inference (`vb!`, `svi!`).

```julia
res = NetworkHawkesProcesses.mle!(process, data; verbose=true, regularize=true) # maximum a posteriori
```

The inference methods available depend on the type of model (see the table below). Processes with `Network` models don't provide maximum-likelihood estimation due to the presence on binary parameters in the adjacency matrix; and only discrete processes provide variational inference methods.

| Model                               | Available Methods              |
| ----------------------------------- | ------------------------------ |
| `ContinuousStandardHawkesProcess`   | `mle!`, `mcmc!`                |
| `ContinuousNetworkHawkesProcess`    | `mcmc!`                        |
| `DiscreteStandardHawkesProcess`     | `mle!`, `mcmc!`, `vb!`, `svi!` |
| `DiscreteNetworkHawkesProcess`      | `mcmc!`, `vb!`, `svi!`         |


!!! note

    All inference methods overwrite model parameters. In addition, each method takes a default initial guess at the model parameters if no initial guess is provided.

!!! tip

    A fast option for an initial guess is to estimate a homogenous Poisson process (although this doesn't provide any guidance for impulse response, network, or connection parameters).


### Reporting Diagnostics
The package provides several useful auxiliary methods to examine models and simulated data.

- `isstable(processs)` checks the stability of a Hawkes process (unstable processes will often fail to generate finite data samples).
- `intensity(process, data, times)` calculates the intensity of a process (given `data`) for all times in `times`.
- `loglikelihood(process, data)` calculates the log-likelihood of a dataset.
- `predictive_loglikelihood` calculates the *predictive* log-likelihood of a dataset, i.e., the log-likelihood of a new dataset conditional on a prior beliefs over model parameters.


### Visualization
The package extends `Gadfly.plot` to visualize simulated data, inference results, and process components.
```julia
plot(process, data)
plot(process, intensity)
plot(baseline, parentnode)
plot(impulse, parentnode, childnode)
plot(weights, links)
plot(samples) # mcmc!
plot(dist) # vb!
```

### Multithreading
Several methods use multithreading to speed up computation. For all such methods, multithreading is turned on by default and uses as many threads as available to the Julia process. To use all local CPU threads (i.e., "logical cores"), start the Julia session with `julia --threads auto`.


## Next Steps
Check out our tutorials and examples to learn more about how the package works and see practical examples of its usage, or browse our API documentation for detailed information on package components.
```@contents
Pages = ["tutorial.md", "examples.md", "api.md"]
```